The hygiene package has given rise to debate in several Member States, including Sweden.
In the great majority of cases, however, the problem has not been the legislation in itself but the implementation of the legislation by the national authorities.
The EU is sacrificing public health for the sake of the profits of European monopolies, which are demanding fewer checks and restraints.
A typical example of EU policy is the latest food scandal of sunflower oil mixed with petroleum, with its disastrous effects on health.
Instead of taking measures to step up restraints on the uncontrolled proceedings of multinationals, the EU and the Member States' governments are merely intervening on exports of sunflower oil from Ukraine.
At the same time, the EU Food Safety Directive is allowing oils and other liquid cargoes intended for human consumption to be carried by container ships transporting petroleum oils and other toxic fluids.
On the pretext of reducing administrative costs for small businesses, the Commission proposes to make yet another exception to the Food Safety Directive, which in itself is inadequate.
Checks on food will be made even more difficult because large multinationals are using monopolies to hide behind in order to avoid any responsibility while carrying on activities that are dangerous and very damaging to public health.
Safe food, in sufficient quantities and at low prices for the workers, is unlikely to be available unless there is a shift in EU policy that serves the interests of the food multinationals and the increase in their profits.
in writing. - (PT) I voted against the Schnellhardt report on the hygiene of foodstuffs because I consider that the Commission's proposed amendment of Regulation (EC) No 852/2004, aimed at exempting small and medium-sized enterprises operating in the food sector from the application of the HACCP (Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point) system, is not currently justified given that to date there is no evidence of specific problems with the application of this procedure.
I consider that 2009, the date when this Regulation must be reviewed, would be the right time to propose any amendments, if they are justified.
in writing. - (PT) The European Parliament today adopted, at first reading, a report on the exemption of food business operators from the Regulation on the hygiene of foodstuffs.
This exemption shall apply to micro-enterprises which sell foodstuffs and not to supermarkets or franchised supermarket chains.
Experience in Portugal shows that this exemption is essential both to defend traditional gastronomy and its associated habits and customs, and to protect family enterprises, which represent a large part of the workers in this sector and which are the ones facing the most difficulties given the competitive imbalance with large groups.
Furthermore, the introduction, application and maintenance of processes based on the principles of the Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) system, which may be important for large enterprises to guarantee food safety, cannot be equally applied to large and small enterprises, particularly in the catering sector.
While it is true that the legislation on foodstuffs must guarantee a high level of protection for the lives and health of people and the interests of consumers, this cannot be confused with the end of traditions and attacks on the gastronomic culture of each country and each region.
in writing. - The EU's regulations on the hygiene of foodstuffs are of importance across the Member States.
They have however at times proven to be somewhat burdensome on smaller businesses.
I welcome the proposals to exempt micro-enterprises and accordingly voted in favour of the Schnellhardt report.
in writing. - (SK) I voted for the report by Mr Horst Schnellhardt because it will result in the reduction of bureaucratic burdens for small and medium-sized enterprises in the food industry, in particular for micro-enterprises (bakeries etc.), it will make business activities more attractive and it will create new jobs.
The report introduces several changes concerning small and medium-sized enterprises producing and selling food, operating on regional and local markets.
These are not veterinary regulations.
When considering the food hygiene package, Parliament wanted above all to ensure the highest possible level of food safety and at the same time to establish a practicable and flexible control mechanism.
Those small and medium-sized enterprises that can prove that there are no hazards in the area of food hygiene and that the hygiene of foodstuffs is regularly controlled are exempt from HACCP procedures.
The HACCP system provides a hazard analysis and a critical control point method.
It was developed in the US in the 1960s by NASA, when the Agency needed to ensure 100% safety of all foodstuffs and nutritional products.
In 1992 the system was incorporated into European legislation.
The Food Code of the Slovak Republic refers to HACCP as 'Proper Production Practice'.
Preparing documentation is complicated and owners of micro-enterprises are discouraged from doing business by unjustifiable bureaucracy.
Since the hygiene regulations in Slovakia are far stricter than those in the 15 old Member States, it is necessary to harmonise the hygiene rules across the entire EU.
in writing. - (IT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I support Horst Schnellhardt's proposal on the hygiene of foodstuffs.
This proposal addresses two distinct problems: firstly, reducing red tape in respect of transport costs and conditions, and secondly, adjusting the rules exempting micro-enterprises from the requirements deriving from the HACCP system, aimed at guaranteeing the maximum degree of food safety and ensuring a high level of protection for human life and health, as well as for consumer interests.
I agree that the HACCP procedures should remain in place: their removal would lessen the likelihood of achieving these objectives, given that the procedures serve the interests of food business operators, enhance food safety standards and levels of responsibility, and guarantee fair competition and flexibility in the free movement of foodstuffs and feedingstuffs intended for consumption within the Community.
This amendment should, lastly, be extended to and approved by all Member States without exception, laying down safety requirements in no uncertain terms.
in writing. - (NL) Mr President, if we mean well toward small and medium-sized enterprises, we have to pass laws that they are also able to comply with.
That also applies to the hygiene regulations for the food sector.
Last year the Commission presented a proposal to amend the provisions of Regulation (EC) No 852/2004 to bring them more into line with what is achievable for the smallest enterprises.
The amendments proposed by the Commission are very useful because they still require small companies to meet hygiene standards but at the same time they relieve them of red tape and of the obligations that are genuinely not feasible for small businesses.
On the one hand, it is unfortunate that Parliament has not completely followed the Commission.
On the other hand, I voted for the final report because we have been able to make some progress towards a solution.
I still regret the fact that the responsibility is being shifted on to the Member States.
Member States will now have to take up their responsibility and allow their small and medium-sized enterprises to depart from the strict HACCP requirements.
in writing. - (RO) The Regulation No 11 on eliminating discrimination in terms of tariffs and transport conditions requires carriers to hold a transport document which should contain, among others, the distances, routes and borders passage points.
In the field of transportations, the proposal aims at the reduction of certain obligations to provide statistics in the transportations field.
Yet, as far as this modification is concerned, only the European Parliament has been consulted.
I voted for amendment no.
12, submitted by the European Socialist Group, afferent to Regulation (EC) No 852/2004 on the hygiene of foodstuffs, in which the competent bodies are allowed to exempt economic agents in the foods sector from the implementation of one or several of the imposed measures, provided that these bodies are capable of proving that there is no risk that must be avoided, or that all identified risks are sufficiently and regularly controlled by means of application of the general and special requirements of hygiene of foodstuffs.
This refers to bakeries, butcheries, fruit and vegetables shops and, mainly, to market stands.
I regret the fact that this amendment did not gather the necessary majority.
The quality of goods and services is becoming an issue of increasing importance to European society.
Quality is a factor in competition between enterprises.
One way is which quality is demonstrated is through possession of the relevant certificate of compliance with quality standards.
The most widespread and most respected standards are the ISO 9000 series standards.
The HACCP system was officially accepted by the World Health Organisation in 1975.
In 1993 it was adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission as an appropriate tool with which to regulate the production of food.
It is considered that a properly implemented HACCP system, together with a quality control system compliant with the ISO 9000 standards is the best way to ensure the provision of healthy food.
The fundamental aim of the method and the HACCP system based upon it is to prevent dangers throughout the food chain and ensure the safety of the final product, whilst providing for appropriate reactions should problems arise.
in writing. - (PT) Directive 96/22/EC prohibits the use of thyrostatic substances, stilbenes, stilbene derivatives, their salts and esters, which are on list A of Annex II, for administration to 'animals of all species', meaning to both animals or animal products used for human consumption as well as to pets.
However, the two products on list B of Annex II may be used under certain conditions.
The Commission's amendment proposes:
to exclude pet animals from the scope of this Directive, which means that prohibitions on the use of certain substances simply do not apply any more to them and they may therefore be treated with these substances;
that the hormone oestradiol 17 ß which was temporarily allowed to be used for farm animals for the treatment of foetus maceration or mummification or for pyrometer will now be banned completely.
The fourth application for oestrus induction in cattle, horses, sheep or goats was granted only until October 2006 and has already expired.
This substance is considered to be carcinogenic and alternatives now exist on the market so that the use of this hormone is redundant and can be banned completely.
in writing. - (PT) The Commission proposes to exclude pet animals from the scope of Council Directive 96/22/EC which would enable their treatment with substances having a thyrostatic action and with beta-agonists.
This important measure is intended to reduce the suffering of pet animals and will allow the use, for example, of substances having a thyrostatic action for the treatment of hyperthyroidism in these animals.
However, the most recent developments in scientific assessment tell us that using these substances is economically unattractive in animal production for human consumption or can be replaced with alternative substances.
It is therefore proposed to prohibit entirely the use of oestradiol 17 ß and its esters in animal production for human consumption, putting an end to the various derogations that still exist today.
I would point out that these hormones, when used to promote growth, can be carcinogenic to human beings and that the existing derogations can finally be ended as these hormones can be replaced with alternative substances without any problems.
These changes will ensure a high level of protection for consumers of meat and animal derivatives while at the same time allowing the treatment and reduction of suffering of pet animals.
in writing. - (PL) I support the report by Mrs Scheele on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council directive 96/22/EC concerning prohibition on the use in stockfarming of certain substances having a hormonal or thyreostatic action and of beta agonists.
This report represents an effort to find an optimum solution catering both for the need to protect human beings, the consumers, and the need to ensure animal welfare.
The report also takes account of scientific research in this area of veterinary science.
In particular, I welcome the complete ban on the use of the hormonal substance named oestradiol 17 β in the rearing of animals raised for meat production.
I believe the ban is entirely appropriate.
Priority must be given to the effort to achieve an appropriate level of food safety, especially bearing in mind that the products referred to in the Directive can cause serious cancers in human beings.
On the other hand, the proposed changes provide for effective treatment of pet animals, such as those suffering from hyperthyroidism or other distressing conditions.
There is therefore provision for the health of both pet and farm animals.
in writing. - (FR) I voted in favour of the report by my German colleague Helmuth Markov, adopted unanimously in the Committee on International Trade, which proposes amending, in accordance with the consultation procedure, the proposal for a Council regulation applying a scheme of generalised tariff preferences for the period from 1 January 2009 to 31 December 2011 and amending various Regulations.
This proposal for a regulation conforms to the 2004 guidelines on the role of the GSP for the 10-year period between 2006 and 2015, which introduced a number of new objectives, such as targeting preferences on countries that most need it, enlarging the product coverage of the GSP to products of interest for developing countries, making the graduation system more transparent and stable and introducing a new special incentive scheme to encourage sustainable development and good governance.
I fully support the report's call for the European Parliament to be more closely involved in this GSP policy, which is crucial for the countries that need it and which costs us EUR 3.5 billion each year in loss of customs revenue.
in writing. - (IT) In a society now dominated by a globalised economic market, in a world where three billion human beings live on less than two dollars a day and more than one billion survive on just one dollar, stimulating economic development in the so-called third world by means of appropriate trade policies is a duty incumbent upon the Community institutions.
In order to achieve this shared goal, we must seek adequate means of both bringing about an improvement in the economic circumstances of developing countries and gradually, increasingly, integrating them into the world market.
In addition, over and above purely economic factors such as market share, other criteria must be borne in mind, such as the beneficiaries' levels of development and commitment to embark on the road to democracy.
Encouragement should moreover be given to those products which are often distinctive of a given country's economy.
While pursuing these goals, however, we must take care not to restrict the developing countries' economies to producing a limited range of goods, especially if these are low added-value products, since that would hamper - rather than foster - development and economic growth in those countries.
in writing. - (FR) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Markov's report on the system of preferential customs duties granted to developing countries is an act of faith in the beneficial effects of global free trade, particularly for the poorest countries.
However, when I turn on the television and watch the news it seems that it is in those countries that famines are taking place.
It seems that it is the choice of the major export crops, to the detriment of the local crops designed to ensure food independence, that is one of the causes of these tragedies.
It seems that 38 years of preferential systems have not made much of an impact on the economic and social situation of these countries and their populations.
It seems that if a system takes so long to generate the benefits purported by its ideological supporters, it if leaves so many people behind, in all countries, if it accentuates inequalities and poverty, it is no longer time to modify it along the way; it is quite simply time to abandon it.
in writing. - (PT) As we have highlighted previously, the current Generalised System of Preferences (GSP) is based on a logic that is in itself contradictory.
In other words, development is promoted in order to liberalise international trade through a model promoting exports, regulated at world level, with a 'centre' and a 'periphery'.
This logic prevents fair international relations and aid for the development of the endogenous factors of less economically developed countries, without which - together with the theft of foreign debt and the imposition of the interests of large multinationals from the US, EU and Japan - these countries will continue to have a peripheral and subordinate status.
Trade is a component of development but is far from being the most important.
The GSP guarantees preferential access for products originating from a very wide range of countries.
The GSP applies to products of particular importance for Portugal (canned tuna, tomato concentrate, textiles and clothing).
Textiles and clothing are particularly affected, especially due to the existence of a high graduation threshold for the sector.
This and other negative aspects need to be changed, otherwise there will be serious consequences for the national productive sector which will result in social and economic consequences.
in writing. - (PL) Mr President, the treatment meted out to Georgia by Russia is simply unacceptable by international standards.